Notes:

~ Traveling Stories ~
- 1 hour/week for 6-9 weeks
- if you're absent more than twice, you'll get kicked out
- if you're unable to make a shift, let them know 24 hours in advance
- we are committed to making reading fun and helping young readers discover the magic of reading
^ so you must be as well haha
- We recommend using online resources. You can use your own book if you have any but prefer something that can be screened shared as it makes it easy to see oppose to showing it via camera.
- read this: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1unDCRo8LFaU-6NCD5m_a1-pBYCjGqNOa/view
- availability settings:
	- Monday: Morning, Night
	- Tuesday: Morning, Night
	- Wednesday: Morning, Night
	- Thursday: Morning, Night
	- Friday: Morning, Night
	- Saturday: Morning, Afternoon, Evening
	- Sunday: Morning, Night

1.	Submit a volunteer application (this will also create a Better Impact account for you) 
2.	Login to Better Impact  Click 'Opportunities' > 'Opportunity Calendar'
3.	Find & Sign Up for a Virtual StoryTent screening time that works with your schedule (If there are currently none once more are added an email will be sent out to you letting you know there are now some available)
4.	Once you sign up for a screening you will receive a Google calendar invite/reminder email before your screening day.

~ 425Tutoring ~
Once a meeting time is established, create a Zoom meeting for that day and send them both the ID and PW.

Questions for them:
What are [Josiah's or Trishika's] academic interests? What about extracurriculars?
What subjects would you like your students to be tutored in? (verification, especially with Trishika and social <- studies???)
For [subject desired], what has your child already learned? What could they improve on?
How many days a week would you like your child to be tutored in each subject? When (time - exact or estimate) on each of those days?
How much homework do you think is adequate for your student <- for Trishika only, and what's the caveat?
Once school starts, would you like your sessions to be homework help or learning sessions?
Is there anything else I should know about your child?

Answers from me:
- Elaborate on your tutor bio!
- Why do you tutor?

Name: Malycia (Ma-li-cee-a) Ashley
Grade: 10th grade, but preparing to graduate (through getting my GED)
School: Homeschooled
Clubs/Extracurriculars: Computing, Foreign Language
Subjects I Enjoy: MATH, Science (esp. Biochemistry), Language Arts/English, and Humanities (specifically US History)
Why I Tutor: I want to help the world become a better place. I love learning and sharing that knowledge. Some other things blah blah blah.
^ seriously though, I need to find a concrete reason...

Also create a tutor bio to elaborate on during initial meeting...

Responses:

~ Traveling Stories ~
Sent! Nothing yet...

~ 425Tutoring ~

For Tutoring with Josiah and Trishika:

Subject: Initial Meeting

Hello!

My name is Malycia Ashley, and I'm a homeschooled sophomore from Washington State. I'm very excited to start tutoring your kids! From my understanding, Josiah and Trishika both would like to work on english, math, and science. 

For the initial meeting, are you both available next Monday (7/11), Thursday (7/14), or Friday (7/15)? Regarding the times on any of those days, anywhere from 10-5pm or 8-10pm PST time? This meeting will be for introductions and discussion about common interests/tutoring goals. It should only be about a half hour meeting.

Again, I'm so excited to help your kids learn and grow!

Best,
Malycia Ashley


~ For New Students ~
I see that I've received a student from Pennsylvania who'd like to be tutored in the morning. As I am from Washington, this might not work due to the time zone difference.

Has this been taken into account?