Should K-12 Students Dissect Animals in Science Classrooms?

Argument For:
Dissecting a real animal provides students with more learning opportunities. 87.5% of teachers polled agreed that “real animal dissection is important to the teaching of biology,” while 56.3% agreed that “there are no substitutes for real animal dissection.” Dissecting an animal offers education in fine motor skills, hand-eye coordination, and handling sharp objects carefully. Hands-on learning keeps students more engaged, which facilitates assimilation of information. The American Psychological Association adds that animal dissection “engenders creativity, original thought, critical thinking, and problem-solving skills.”

Using a real animal also helps to instruct students on the ethics of using animals in research. Teachers can explain how the animals were sourced, demonstrate proper treatment of dead animals, and imbue a respect for life among students.

Dissection can encourage students to pursue careers in science. Vicki Besack, a high school science teacher in Florida, said, “Dissection...is an amazing hands-on experience,” adding that it “has the power to cause a student to change how they think about science and possibly what they may pursue as a career. It gives them that ‘aha’ moment.” Teachers report that students gain invaluable hands-on science experience from dissection, including putting on lab coats and gloves, handling scalpels, and looking at samples under microscopes. The entire process can spark inspiration and excitement.

Julianna Music, a former high school student, argued in favor of dissection in the classroom by stating, “Biology is the study of life, and dissection is crucial for the understanding of life; it is a hands-on way to learn and paves a pathway for students with dreams of careers in that field...[I]t lays the foundation for possible discoveries in animal diseases and prepares young people to become future veterinarians.” One of Music’s classmates developed a desire to become an optometrist after dissecting a sheep eye in school.

Animal dissection is a productive and worthwhile use for dead animals. A large portion of dissected animals were already dead before being allocated for dissection. Having students dissect the animals allows for a learning opportunity instead of just wasting the animal. Bio Corp, a biological supply company, reported that more than 98% of the animals they received were already dead. Bill Wadd, Co-Owner of Bio Corp, stated, “We just take what people would throw away. Instead of throwing it in the trash, why not have students learn from it?”

Most animals used in classroom dissections are purchased from biological supply companies. Some animals, such as cats, are sourced from shelters that have already euthanized the animals. However, cats and dogs account for fewer than 1% of lab animals. Fetal pigs are byproducts of the meat industry that would have otherwise been sent to a landfill.

~

Argument Against:
Methods used to supply animals for dissections are bad for the environment and inhumane. An estimated 99% of animals used in dissections are caught in the wild, a practice that may decrease local populations, lead to an imbalance in the ecosystem, and reduce biodiversity. Fetal pigs used in schools are sourced from the meat industry and grown in horrific conditions. Animalearn, the educational arm of the American Anti-Vivisection Society, said, “they are deprived of space, fresh air, and fresh forage for the duration of their shortened lives...The fetuses that end up in the dissection tray are taken from pregnant sows at the slaughterhouse.”

Animals sold to schools for dissection may have died by suffocation, electrocution, drowning, or euthanasia. Cats and dogs used for dissection are sourced from shelters that unnecessarily euthanize the animals instead of adopting them out to families.

Medical studies do not require or benefit from animal dissection. Animal dissection is not required by the College Board for AP Biology, the International Baccalaureate for IB Biology, or the Next Generation Science Standards. The inclusion of dissection units actually dissuades some students from taking elective science classes.

The Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine says that “Animal dissection is not required for students to learn about and be engaged in science.” The group found that no medical schools in the US or Canada use animals to train new physicians; revered medical programs at schools such as Stanford, Yale, Harvard, and the Mayo Clinic all use alternatives to animals.

Nedim C. Buyukmihci, Professor of Ophthalmology at the Veterinary Medicine School of the University of California at Davis, stated, “As one who did not dissect in high school, and who now is a veterinarian and trains doctors-to-be, I can unequivocally state that the experience of dissection is totally unnecessary for the biologically minded precollege student.”

Dissecting real animals is unnecessary since alternatives exist. Synthetic frogs made by SynDaver have the same visual and textural qualities as a dead female frog: skeletons with muscles, skin, and organs, including a reproductive system with eggs. The models can be reused year-after-year and don’t need toxic formaldehyde for preservation. Students can use the model multiple times to gain a deeper understanding of the animal’s anatomy. Technological advances have led to computer programs that can simulate the dissection of frogs, squid, fetal pigs, starfish, and cow eyes. [22]

According to a meta-review by the Humane Society, students learn just as well or better when models and computer simulations are substituted for dead animals. Models and simulations also eliminate the “gross-out factor” of smelly, slimy real dead frogs, allowing students to focus on the learning activity rather than nausea.