~ US History ~

Thinking Like a Historian:
- N/A

~

Source Identification:
- primary source is the main source, such as:
  - photography
	- a diary
	- a speech
	- even a shopping list (depending on what you're researching)

- secondary source is your interpretation of what happened

~

Analyzing a Historical Text:
- find out what the people are vs. aren't talking about
^ using the photography analogy, what's outside their view? What's inside their view?

- also find out what the source can tell you (and what it doesn't tell you)

~

Avoiding Common Mistakes in Historical Essays:
- avoid the following sayings:
  - "Throughout history..."
	- "It was inevitable..."
	- "And that's why [insert country] is so great today!"

- instead use:
  - "In the [insert specific time period] in the [insert place(s)]"
	- "The [insert catalyst] caused [insert effect of catalyst]"

~

Native Societies Before Contact:
- three-sister farming = corn, beans, squash

~

Native American Culture of the Southwest:
Q: How did the introduction of agriculture affect the religious practices of the ancient southwestern Native Americans?

A: The introduction of agriculture affected the religious practices of the ancient southwestern Native Americans because, when a 50-year drought hit (and later a major flood) hit, they started "...praying to their gods for a bountiful harvest and good weather."

Q: How did the Ancestral Pueblos urbanize the southwest region? How did that compare to the Native Americans in the northeast region?

A: The Ancestral Pueblos urbanized the southwest region by being more sedentary and living in stone and adobe abodes (due to a plethora of food and stability). They were very unlike the Native Americans in the northeast region because while they settled down, Native Americans such as Navajos and Apaches continued to hunt, gather, and move.

Q: Do you think the Ancestral Pueblos should have continued hunting and gathering for their main source of nourishment? Why or why not?

A: I think the Ancestral Pueblos should have continued hunting and gathering for their main source of nourishment. If they had, the drought and flood might not have hit them so hard (although it's still a drought and flood, so...).

~

Native American Culture of the West:
Q: How did proximity to natural resources determine social position in the West?

A: Proximity to natural resources determined social position in the West because the men would hunt and fish, the women would harvest crops and prepare meat (for food and trade), and the slaves would complete laborious tasks (like processing bison).

Q: What do you think would happen to the societal structure of a large village near the river if natural resources were depleted, by overfishing or natural disaster? How would the group’s lifestyle and social organization change?

A: What I think would be the effect on societal structure if natural resources were depleted would be that competition would be high for the remaining resources (just as it is in the animal kingdom). Or, depending on their social hierarchy, the [remaining] resources would go directly to the top of the pyramid.

Q: When did hunters and gatherers live nomadically? When did they establish villages? Why?

A: Hunters and gatherers lived nomadically when food sources weren't reliable (as the passage states, "The structure of shelter oftentimes indicated the reliability of the food source: the more plentiful the fish and acorns in the area, the more likely that indigenous people lived in homes within societies that were there to stay."). Using this tidbit of knowledge, it can be assumed that they established villages once there was a surplus of food. That makes sense, because then they wouldn't have to hunt or gather so much.

~

Native American Culture of the Northeast:
Q: How did agriculture contribute to the settlement types of indigenous people in the Northeast?

A: Agriculture contributed to the settlement type of indigenous people in the Northeast because, as they became more urbanized, they lived together in fortified villages to protect their harvests.

Q: Make your own hypothesis about why Native American communities constructed mounds. Draw a connection to relevant historical evidence.

A: I do agree with their hypothesis (that the mounds may have served burial and ceremonial purposes).

Q: How does the political organization of Iroquois League resemble the United States of America? What is different and what is the same?

A: I don't know enough about US Government and Civics to answer this yet, though I will answer once I learn more.

~

Native American Culture of the Southeast:
Q: Compare and contrast Hopewellian and Mississippian culture. How were they similar? How were they different?

A: Hopewellian and Mississippian cultures were alike and different in many ways. They both had mound-building traditions (although M's version were larger). They both farmed, hunted, and fished. One major difference between the two is that one created longhouses and one created pottery/arrow points.

Q: Why do you think the agricultural success of Mississippians led to social stratification?

A: I think that the agricultural success of Mississippians led to social stratification because they started to concentrate wealth at the top. They also forced prisoners of war to work their fields (a form of slavery).

Q: How did trade influence large Mississippian societies like Cahokia or Poverty Point?

A: Trade influenced large M. societies by making them even larger (this is kinda wrong...)

~

Native American Culture of the Plains:
Q: Consider the teepee and the earth lodge. How do different living structures across the Plains reflect the cultural practices of Native Americans?

A: Different living structures reflect the cultural practices of Native Americans because nomadic indigenous peoples used teepees, whereas more sedentary people used earth lodges.

Q: How did the introduction of horses change Native American life?

A: The introduction of horses changed Native life because they - at least on the Plains - became less egalitarian. Instead of believing that all people deserved equal rights and equal say, the men (MEN) with the most horses had the most impact politically, higher social status, and more economic power.

Q: Why do you think some Native Americans organized in larger groups or villages, while others operated in small bands?

A: I think that some Native Americans organized in larger groups/villages, whereas others operated in small bands, because it's easier to work together to hunt and feed everyone when there are more people.

~

Pre-Colonization European Society:
Q: How was serfdom similar to African slavery? How was it different?

A: I don't know enough about African slavery to answer this question.

Q: How did the Christian Church affect political, economic, and social life of the Middle Ages?

A: The Christian Church affected [all of the above] because village and family life revolved around the Church.

Q: Explain how the Christian church dictated future European colonization projects.

A: I have absolutely no idea.

~

African Societies [...]:
Q: How did religion, natural resources, and location each determine the prosperity of African societies?

A: Religion determined the prosperity of African societies because, with the spread of Islam, only those who converted to Islam could rule or be engaged in trade. I'm not sure about the other two.

Q: What role did the Atlantic slave trade play within European competition during the colonial era?

A: Also don't even know what this means LMAO