Is Binge-Watching Good for You?

Argument For:
Binge-watching establishes beneficial social connections. The act of bingeing content fosters a sense of community around a show, something experts call a “shared cultural space.” This common ground allows viewers to discuss and enjoy the show with everyone from a coworker to the stranger in line at the grocery store. This shared space makes it easier to relate to other people and share personal perspectives.

Romantic relationships can also be strengthened by binge-watching together because it serves as a fun activity that creates a shared interest and offers an easy way to spend time together. Licensed professional counselorHeidi McBain said that “if both people are partaking without distractions, laughing together, holding hands... quality time is being fostered.” A study published in the Journal of Social and Personal Relationships found that binge-watching can help long-distance relationships by replacing shared activities such as going to dinner together and having mutual friends.

Binge-watching has health benefits like stress relief. According to psychiatrists, binge-watching releases dopamine in the brain, which creates a feeling of pleasure and can help people to relax and relieve stress. Psychologists say that finishing a series can give viewers feelings of control and power, which can be beneficial if viewers are not feeling that in their daily lives.

John Mayer, PhD, clinical psychologist, stated, “We are all bombarded with stress from everyday living... It is hard to shut our minds down and tune out the stress and pressures. A binge can work like a steel door that blocks our brains from thinking about those constant stressors that force themselves into our thoughts.”

With the rise of at-home workouts, binge-watching can be paired with exercise. Adding a favorite show to an exercise routine can make the time pass more quickly, add motivation, and increase compliance with an exercise routine. Jan Van den Bulck, Professor of Communication and Media at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, stated, “Two years ago, I bought a good indoor rower and told myself I am allowed to watch whatever I want when I am on that machine, and it has helped me to row every day for 45 minutes with no feelings of guilt and no boredom. The cliffhangers work to my advantage: it makes me want to row more the next day.”

Binge-watching makes a show more fulfilling. While binge-watching, the viewer can feel the pleasure of full immersion (aka “the zone”), which is a great feeling similar to staying up all night to finish a book or project. Shows made for binge-watching, such as Orange Is the New Black and Stranger Things, are often more sophisticated and have multiple intricate storylines, complex relationships, and multi-dimensional characters. Watching several episodes at once tends to make the story easier to follow and more enjoyable than a single episode. That’s a big reason why the show You went unnoticed while airing on Lifetime but became a sensation once available to binge on Netflix.

~

Argument Against:
Binge-watching leads to mental health issues. A University of Texas study found that binge-watchers were more likely to be depressed, lonely, and have less self-control. One of the study’s authors, Yoon Hi Sung, PhD, stated: “When binge-watching becomes rampant, viewers may start to neglect their work and their relationships with others.” Binge-watching can lead to addiction. Dr. Renee Carr, a clinical psychologist, said, “The neuronal pathways that cause heroin and sex addictions are the same as an addiction to binge watching. Your body does not discriminate against pleasure. It can become addicted to any activity or substances that consistently produces dopamine.”

A study found that rather than relieving stress, excessive TV watching is associated with regret, guilt, and feelings of failure because of a sense of wasted time. When that binge-watching session is over, the viewer may be more likely to “mourn” the loss of the show by experiencing depression, anxiety, and feelings of emptiness. 

Maricarmen Vizcaino, a Research Scholar in the College of Health Solutions at the University of Arizona, stated, “you would assume that people will feel happier because they’re watching their show, or they’re [watching] some entertainment, but that’s not the case — people are more stressed out, if they’re binge-watching.”

Binge-watching can cause serious physical health problems. Sitting for extended periods of time has long been linked to slow metabolism, heart disease, cancer, blood clots, and deep vein thrombosis. Binge-watchers are prone to sit on the couch eating unhealthy food and snacking more, which is linked to weight gain.

One study found that binge-watching was related to poorer sleep quality, more fatigue, and insomnia, because of pre-sleep arousal. Researchers have also found that watching three or more hours of TV a day is associated with premature death. Another study concluded, “Heavy users reported the least healthful dietary patterns and the poorest health-related characteristics... Binge-watching was also significantly associated with less healthy dietary patterns, including frequency of fast-food consumption as well as eating family meals in front of a television, and perceived stress.”

Binge-watching makes the show less fulfilling. A study found that people who watched multiple episodes of a show in one sitting reported “significantly less show enjoyment” than people who watched one episode at a time. Damon Lindelof, the co-creator of popular shows such as Lost, stated, “This idea of anticipation. That Christmas morning feeling...doesn’t exist in binge culture.”

The popularity of bingeing shows makes social media a minefield of spoilers for people who haven’t had time to finish a new season, and a lack of agreement over when the spoiler embargo should be lifted causes rifts among shows’ fanbases.