Should Employers Be Able to Mandate Vaccinations?

Argument For:
Vaccine mandates have a history of effectively reducing the spread and health consequences of communicable disease. Mandates increase vaccination rates, and high vaccination rates lower disease infection rates overall, as well as the severity of diseases in vaccinated people. This is proven by data related to American school kids. States with stricter school vaccine mandates had a higher percentage of vaccinated children and a lower rate of vaccine-preventable diseases in children.

The history of vaccine mandates effectively curbing the spread and consequences of disease date to the first US “vaccine” mandate. The smallpox mortality rate during the US Revolutionary War was about 50%. Both sides were losing troops at an alarming rate. The British Army did not inoculate their troops. However, once General George Washington ordered all Continental Army troops be inoculated against smallpox, the mortality rate for Washington’s troops dropped to 2%–a feat some historians say won the Revolutionary War.

For a more current example, journalist Dan Gorenstein, summarized a 2020 study on hospital employee vaccine mandates: “So in the case of the California hospitals, the [flu vaccine] mandates increased uptake of the flu shot by about 10%. But...what makes this paper really interesting is that...[t]here was a 40% drop in the number of people who entered the hospital and caught the flu inside the facility...[and] a 20% drop in the number of people coming to the hospital with flu-like symptoms. So here’s the big idea: Increasing vaccination rates made the hospitals themselves safer and it meant fewer people in the community were getting sick. So for employers who are thinking about whether to institute the [vaccine] mandate or not, they could ask themselves, is my business a social hub the way, like, a hospital is? And the bigger your business is a social hub, the more a vaccine mandate could curb spread.”

Vaccine mandates are time-tested policies, proven successful in the workplace. The CDC found that when healthcare employers required the flu vaccine, 85% of employees complied. When employers did not mandate the flu vaccine, only 43% got the flu vaccine. Essentia Health, a hospital chain in the US Midwest, had a 70% flu vaccination rate among employees from 2012 to 2015. When employees had to report whether they were vaccinated with a simple “yes” or “no” in 2016, the vaccination rate rose to 82%. And, when a vaccine mandate with exemptions was implemented in 2017, the compliance rate rose to 99.5%.

Lawrence O. Gostin, Professor of Global Health Law at Georgetown University, explained, “Many business and educational mandates fall into the ‘hard’ [mandate] category—that is, students or workers cannot attend classes or the workplace unless they are fully vaccinated. ‘Soft’ mandates ‘nudge’ people to get vaccinated. When getting a vaccine is the ‘easier’ or ‘default’ option, most opt for the [vaccination] jab. Thus, when given the choice between getting a vaccine or having to undergo one to two SARS-CoV-2 [COVID-19] tests weekly and masking up, most people will eventually roll up their sleeves. How do we know? Well, in states that have wide and easy exemptions for childhood vaccines, a significant number of parents opt out. But if a state makes getting the exemption hard, such as requiring a written declaration, a doctor’s certificate or attending vaccine literacy classes, vaccine hesitancy melts away.”

Vaccine mandates are reasonable conditions of employment, and most employees agree. While headlines abound proclaiming the firing of workers who have refused vaccination, most workers comply with mandates to keep or start a job. For example, a Jan. 25, 2022, headline in The Hill stated, “73 San Diego school workers terminated over vaccine mandate.” Buried in the article is the fact that 99% of San Diego school workers were vaccinated or received an exemption. 

When Essentia implemented a flu vaccine mandate across their Midwest hospital chain in 2017, only 50 of almost 14,000 employees were fired for non-compliance with the mandate, or about 0.35% of the workforce. A Dec. 2, 2021, survey found that 31% of employers worried vaccine mandates would result in employee resignations. However, only 13% of employers reported resignations connected to vaccine mandates. A Jan. 2022 poll completed after the US Supreme Court struck down the federal vaccine mandate found 56% of those surveyed supported employer COVID-19 vaccine mandates, with 33% opposed to such mandates and the other 10% saying they had no opinion. Even 23% of unvaccinated employees supported a mandate.

~

Argument Against:
Employer vaccine mandates violate personal privacy and may exacerbate intolerance and discrimination in the workplace. Employees may have health or other reasons for not being vaccinated. While employers are required to allow exemptions, the paperwork may require an employee to disclose sensitive personal information that could, unfortunately, be used against the employee.

Religious intolerance has been on the rise in the US, particularly antisemitism and Islamophobia. If a person declares a sincerely held religious belief as a reason for non-vaccination, an employer could discriminate against the employee either by not accommodating a vaccine waiver or other actions. Vaccine mandates force employees to disclose religious beliefs they may have otherwise kept secret if their workplace is an intolerant environment.

Some people with less visible disabilities or medical conditions who do not require other accommodation may prefer not to divulge medical information to their employers. A medical waiver often requires “medical evidence” for the exemption, exposing private information to an employer. While such discrimination is illegal, several healthcare providers have recently been successfully sued by employees who claimed their sincerely held religious beliefs and medical conditions were not accommodated as vaccine mandate exemptions.

Further, exemptions often require that the employee wear a mask, be tested daily, or work from home, which broadcasts vaccination status to coworkers who may ask intrusive questions or discriminate, straining employee relationships. Google employees wrote, “​​barring unvaccinated Googlers from the office publicly and possibly embarrassingly exposes a private choice as it would be difficult for the Googler not to reveal why they cannot return.”

Vaccine mandates are not the most effective workplace policy; offering alternatives to vaccinations works better. Journalist Yasmeen Serhan noted, “In the United States, being vaccinated is more common than drinking coffee, owning a television cable box or satellite dish, or even watching the Super Bowl.” 

Because a high percentage of employees will already be vaccinated, or agreeable to additional vaccines, employer policies are necessarily directed toward people who are under- or unvaccinated and who may be vaccine hesitant. A 2019 study found vaccine hesitant people “far outnumbered” vaccine refusers and recommended counseling and education because mandates are not the best way to change peoples’ minds about vaccines.

As lawyers Charlene A. Barker Gedeus and Alexis Aloi Graziano explained, “In an effort to increase employee immunization, employers may choose to educate and incentivize vaccinations. Employers opting out of mandatory vaccines should educate staff about how to prevent disease and the benefits of vaccination, sponsor vaccination sites at work, and institute policies that encourage employees to remain at home if they aren’t feeling well. Providing employees with credible information from the CDC is a necessary and meaningful step toward ensuring a safe work environment.” Offering alternatives, including testing, masking, and working offsite, may be more effective for the few who refuse vaccination.

Employer vaccine mandates can doubly harm marginalized communities. People of color and LGBTQ+ people have high rates of healthcare distrust due to current and historical medical mistreatment and discrimination, which can translate into vaccine hesitancy.

As the Commonwealth Fund explained, “The medical establishment has a long history of mistreating Black Americans — from gruesome experiments on enslaved people to the forced sterilizations of Black women and the infamous Tuskegee syphilis study that withheld treatment from hundreds of Black men for decades to let doctors track the course of the disease.” These concerns have continued into the modern medicine era and are applicable to other communities of color, including Hispanics and Native Americans. LGBTQ+ people frequently face discrimination, refusal of care, assault, and other hurdles when accessing healthcare, and they therefore often forgo or delay medical care. 

Additionally, these communities face pay gaps, high rates of unemployment, and job insecurity. In Feb. 2021, Black (9.9%) and Hispanic (8.5%) workers had higher unemployment rates than white workers (5.6%). A 2020 report indicated 17% of LGBTQ+ people lost jobs due to the pandemic, compared to 13% of the general population. Combining a legitimate, historical distrust of institutionalized healthcare with a threat of job loss is not good policy.