Should Corporal Punishment Be Used in K-12 Schools?

Argument For:
Corporal punishment is the appropriate discipline for certain children when used in moderation. The negative effects of corporal punishment cited by critics are attached to prolonged and excessive use of the punishment. Occasional use for serious behavioral issues is appropriate because time-out or taking away a toy may not work to correct behavior in a particularly willful or rambunctious child.

LaShaun Williams, founder of childcare group Sitter Circle, stated, “there are some children who like to push their limits. Those are the children who may require a pop. Knowing your child is the key to nailing down the most effective forms of discipline...[T]oday’s disrespectful youth have shown what happens when necessary spanking is forgone.”

Corporal punishment sets clear boundaries and motivates children to behave in school. Children are better able to make decisions about their behavior, exercise self-control, and be accountable for their actions when they understand the penalty they face for misbehaving is comparable to their actions. Harold Bennet, PhD, President and Dean of the Charles H. Mason Theological Seminary, stated, “children need to understand boundaries and I think that children need to understand that there should be punishments...in direct proportion to the improper behavior that they might demonstrate.”

Some experts state that corporal punishment prevents children from persisting in their bad behavior and growing up to be criminals.

Corporal punishment is often chosen by students over suspension or detention. When given the choice, students frequently choose corporal punishment because it is a quick punishment that doesn’t cause older children to miss class or other activities, or younger children to miss their valued time on the playground. The child’s education is not interrupted and make-up work is not required for missed class instruction.

Allison Collins, a high school senior at Robbinsville High School in North Carolina, stated she chose corporal punishment over in-school suspension when her phone rang in class. Her principal, David Matheson, stated, “Most kids will tell you that they choose the paddling so they don’t miss class.”

~

Argument Against:
Corporal punishment can inflict long-lasting physical and mental harm on students. A Dec. 2016 study found that children who were physically punished were more likely to have problems with aggression and attention. Studies have shown that frequent use of corporal punishment leads to a higher risk for anxiety, depression, substance abuse, stress, and other mental health concerns. Children who experience corporal punishment are more likely to relate forms of violence with power, and are, therefore, more likely to be a bully or abuse a partner.

Corporal punishment creates an unsafe and violent school environment. The American Academy of Pediatrics says corporal punishment “may contribute to disruptive and violent student behavior.” Children who experience corporal punishment are more likely to hit or use other violence against people in order to get their way, putting other children at risk for increased bullying and physical abuse and teachers in potentially violent classrooms.

The American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry stated, “[c]orporal punishment signals to the child that a way to settle interpersonal conflicts is to use physical force and inflict pain. Such children may in turn resort to such behavior themselves.”

Corporal punishment is an inappropriate punishment that harms the education of children. Corporal punishment has been banned in US prisons and military training, and animals are protected from the same sort of punishment in every state. Students who experience corporal punishment in kindergarten are more likely to have lower vocabulary scores in fourth grade and lower fifth grade math scores.

According to the National Women’s Law Center, “Harsh physical punishments do not improve students’ in-school behavior or academic performance. In fact...schools in states where corporal punishment is used perform worse on national academic assessments than schools in states that prohibit corporal punishment.”